
As we learned earlier [in the cell balancing discussion](./4.cell_ballancing.md), a good battery pack monitors individual cell voltage. This is done by the BMS.

For example, the origin jr 2 bms:
> The Orion Jr. 2 BMS unit monitors the voltage of each individual cell (through the cell tap wires) to ensure cell voltages remain within a specified range.

https://www.orionbms.com/products/orion-jr2-bms/

--

purchasing guide for the orion jr 2 bms:
- https://www.orionbms.com/manuals/pdf/jr2_purchasing_guide.pdf
- options are:
  - with can port / without can port
  - 8 cells / 16 cells
- also lists and has images of all of the accessories that are useful and can be bought
- we got
  - can + 16 cell (because we wanted can and didn't know about the 8 cell version :joy:) (https://evolveelectrics.com/products/bms-orion-jr-02?list_generator=order_line_item&user_id=9386682&utm_source=shop_app&context=order_first_order_summary_line_item)
  - cell tap wiring harness
  - io wiring harness
  - wifi module
  - 500amp current sensor

we got it with the 500amp current sensor

--

https://www.orionbms.com/manuals/pdf/jr2_wiring_manual.pdf
read the wiring instructions for how to wire it up. heres the overview though:

1. lots of warnings, make sure to consider each one
   1. bms must have ability to shut off charging and discharging
   2. dont mess with wiring while wiring harnesses are connected to bms, you can fry it
   3. be super careful that the cell taps are wired correctly, you can fry the bms
   4. protect the battery with a fuse
   5. all cells in battery should be tapped and monitored by bms
   6. orion bms should not be used for life support systems
   7. dont use parallel battery packs unless you're willing to invest a ton more time + equipment + skill and one bms per pack
   8. dont open the bms
   9. dont use w/ more than 48v systems

2. the gist:
   1. the bms uses inputs
      1. cell voltage taps
      2. total pack voltage tap
      3. hall-effect current sensor
      4. thermistors
   2. to protect the battery
      1. limit charging
      2. limit discharging

3. there are multiple ways that orion can limit charging and discharging
   1. current limiting w/ canbus
   2. current limiting w/ analog outputs
   3. current limiting w/ on/off signal from BMS

We'll be using the on/off singal from the bms

The on off signals the BMS emits are:
  - charger safety enable: charger safety enable is used to control a battery charger
  - discharge enable: discharge enable is used to control a load such a motor controller or AC inverter
  - charge enable: charge enable is used to turn off intermittent charging currents such as charge from regenerative braking

More information about how the outputs are wired and how they function can be found later in this
manual as well as in the operational manual. Information on changing the setting for when these
outputs are on can be found in the software manual.

4. Main Input/Output (I/O) Connector - wires 1-20
  pin 1.  [use] Charge Enable Signal (Out)
      1. TL:DR;
        1. connect to relay+contactor that controls "charge"
        2. fuse at 175mA
      2. Details:
         1.  An open drain digital on/off signal (i.e., connects to ground when open)
         2.  used to signal to a load that the load can charge the battery
              1.  This would normally be used to control regenerative breaking in a mobile application or
              2.  enable a solar or wind charge in a stationary application.
         3.   This is a signal current level (175mA max) and should be amplified for controlling large contactors or relays (see electrical specs)
         4.   This pin is enabled in both READY and CHARGE modes and is turned on (pulled low) as soon as the BMS has gone through self checks and determined that the battery is able to be charged.
         5.   This output will turn off (float high) if the BMS determines that the battery can no longer accept a charge or if the maximum charge amperage is exceeded.
            1.   If the BMS turns this output off (and if the charger safety output is also off), but still measures current flowing into the battery pack afterwards, a critical error will be set on the BMS resulting in the disabling of all charge and discharge until the BMS has been reset as a safety feature.
  pin 2.  [use] READY Power Source (In)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect to battery positive busbar
          2.  fuse at 3A
      2.  Details:
          1.  This power source should be connected to a 12V - 48V nominal power source whenever the BMS should be active for normal use.
          2.   This input must be fused at no more than 3A.
          3.  The voltage on this pin may not exceed 60V at any time
          4.  This is the primary power source for the Orion Jr. 2 BMS unit
              1.  This power source can be thought of as the “ignition” power source when the BMS is used in mobile applications (e.g., EVs)
          5.  When power is present at this source, the BMS will allow both normal charge and discharge
          6.  When powered only by this power source (i.e. charge power is not present), the BMS:
              1.   will not engage the charger safety output (usually used to control a battery charger)
              2.   will not allow cell balancing.
  pin 3. [use] Discharge Enable Signal (Out)
     1. TL:DR;
        1. connect to relay+contactor that controls "discharge" / "load"
        2. fuse at 175mA
     2. Details:
        1. An open drain digital on/off signal used to signal to a load that the load can discharge the battery.
        2. used to control a discharge contactor
        3.  This is a signal current level (175mA max) and should be amplified for controlling large contactors or relays (see electrical specs.)
        4.  This pin is enabled in both READY and CHARGE modes and is turned on (pulled low) as soon as the BMS has gone through self checks and determined that the battery is able to be discharged.
        5.  This output will turn off (float high) if the BMS determines that the battery can no longer provide current or if the maximum discharge amperage is exceeded.
            1.   If the BMS turns this output off, but still measures current flowing out of the battery pack afterwards, a critical error will be set on the BMS resulting in the disabling of all charge and discharge until the BMS has been reset.
  pin 4.  [use] CHARGE Power Source (In)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect to battery positive busbar, behind a switch (manually toggled when on shore power / want balancing)
          2.  fuse at 3A
      2.  Details:
          1. This power source should be connected to a 12V - 48V nominal power source whenever the BMS should be active for a defined charging period.
          2. When powered by this source, the BMS enters charging mode.
          3.  This power source should be energized when the battery is in a defined charging phase such as being fully charged by an AC battery charger.
          4.  When power is present at this pin, the BMS will enter charging mode, which enables
              1.  cell balancing
              2.  enables the charger safety signal output.
          5.  For most applications, this is used when the BMS is in a defined charging phase from AC power.
          6.  Because of this, CHARGE power is normally provided by a small AC / DC power adapter powered off the mains.
  pin 5.  Charge Safety Signal (Out)
      1.  TL:DR;
         1. do nothing with this, use pin #1 instead
         2. this is like an "extra" charge controller output - for AC/shore power bulk chargers, but pin #1 is the main controller
      2.  Details:
          1.  An open drain digital on/off signal used as a safety switch for a charger.
          2.  This signal is normally connected to the charger or connected to a relay which enables AC power to the charger such that the lack of this signal will cause the charger to be inactive.
          3.  Will only be openable if pin #4 is powered (e.g,. an external charger is connected)
  pin 6.  [use] Power Ground  (In)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect to battery ground busbar
      2.  Details:
          1.  This is the ground for the supply power for the BMS.
          2.  Both powersources (READY and CHARGE) share this ground, and grounds for these power sources must be bonded together externally.
  pin 7.   Multi Purpose Enable (Out)
       1.   TL:Dr;
            1.   do nothing with this
       2.   Details
            1.   An open drain digital on/off signal with configurable behavior.
            2.   This is a signal current level (175mA max) and should be amplified for controlling large contactors or relays (see electrical specs.)
            3.    Please see the software manual for a complete list of available functions.
            4.    This output is watchdog backed and will turn off when certain faults occur, regardless of programmed settings.
  pin 8.   [use] Thermistor Ground (In)
       1.   TL:DR;
            1.   connect to battery ground busbar
       2.   Details:
            1.   One leg of each of the two thermistors should be grounded to this ground.
            2.   Both thermistors share this ground return.
  pin 9. Multi Purpose Output 1 (Out)
        1. TL:DR;
           1. do nothing with this
           2. (consider running an led with this at some point?)
        2. Details:
           1. The behavior of this multi-purpose output is configured in software for additional functionality.
           2. This output is often used to drive an LED to indicate the presence of error codes, but can also be used as a CAN controlled output as well as other functions.
           3. Please see the software manual for a complete list of available functions.
           4. This output is NOT watchdog backed and may remain on when certain faults occur.
  pin 10.  [use] Thermistor 1 (In)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect a thermistor leg to this
      2.  Details:
          1.  One leg of each of the thermistors should be connected to the respective thermistor pin.
          2.  These pins connect to 10K NTC thermistors.
  pin 11. Analog 5v Output: State of Charge (Out)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  do nothing with this
          2.  (consider reporting w/ a pi with this?)
          3.  consider a bargraph voltmeter?: https://www.electronics-lab.com/project/bargraph-voltmeter-0-5v-dc-range-pic16f686/
      2.  Details:
          1.  0-5V analog output that represents state of charge
  pin 12. [use] Thermistor 2 (In)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect a thermistor leg to this
      2.  Details:
          1.  One leg of each of the thermistors should be connected to the respective thermistor pin.
          2.  These pins connect to 10K NTC thermistors.
  pin 13. Analog 5v Output: Charge Current Limit (Out)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  do nothing with this
          2.  (consider reporting w/ a pi with this?)
      2.  Details:
          1.  0-5V analog output that represents charge current limit
  pin 14. Analog 5v Output: Discharge Current (Out)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  do nothing with this
          2.  (consider reporting w/ a pi with this?)
      2.  Details:
          1.  0-5V analog output that represents discharge current
  pin  15. Multi Purpose Input (In)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  do nothing with this
      2.  Details:
          1. This is an input signal that can have multiple different input functions such as redundant keep-awake power signals, clearing DTC fault codes and other functions.
          2. Please see the software manual for a complete list of available functions.
          3. The voltage range for this pin is 9-60V
  pin 16.  [use] Thermistor 3 (In)
      3.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect a thermistor leg to this
      4.  Details:
          1.  One leg of each of the thermistors should be connected to the respective thermistor pin.
          2.  These pins connect to 10K NTC thermistors.
  pin 17. Multi Purpose Output 2 (Out)
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  do nothing with this
      2.  Details:
          1.  same as pin #9
  pin 18. null
  pin [use] 19. CAN_L
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect to the wifi module
      2.  Details:
          1.  CAN interface low signal line
          2.  Only available on units ordered with CANBUS.
  pin [use] 20. CAN_H
      1.  TL:DR;
          1.  connect to the wifi module
      2.  Details:
          1.  CAN interface high signal line
          2.  Only available on units ordered with CANBUS.


Summary:
- pin #1: charge relay control; 175mA fuse [Charge Enable Signal] [gray]
- pin #2: battery positive busbar; 3A fuse [READY Power Source] [blue]
- pin #3: load relay control; 175mA fuse [Discharge Enable Signal] [blue/white]
- pin #4: battery positive busbar, behind a switch (manually toggled when on shore power / want balancing); 3A fuse [CHARGE Power Source] [red]
- pin #6: battery ground busbar [Power Ground] [white]
- pin #8: battery ground busbar [Thermistor Ground] [black/white]
- pin #10: thermistor leg [Thermistor 1] [yellow]
- pin #11: future: consider connecting to pi [Analog 5v Output: State of Charge] [black]
- pin #12: thermistor leg [Thermistor 2] [purple]
- pin #16; thermistor leg [Thermistor 3] [green]
- pin #19; CAN_L of wifi module [CAN_L] [black-inside-2gang]
- pin #20; CAN_H of wifi module [CAN_H] [red-inside-2gang]

(!) Note how the digital signals on pins #1, #3, and #5 all have a max current of 175mA. You _must_ use a relay/transistor before the large contactor to make sure that too much current does not go through these pins. Also, use a fuse to make sure of this as well. In our system, we're using relays w/ an operating current of 70ma - and one fuse for both of them at 150mA. The relays then control the contactors, which each may take more than 175mA when opening up.
  https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B089NFSP21/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_search_asin_title?ie=UTF8&psc=1

(!) Note how power sources on pins #2, x, and y all have max currents - and must be fused. Do not forget to fuse inputs.

(?) Question: how to distinguish charging mode from ready mode? Our charge inputs are connected to load outputs... which are all connected to main battery positive busbar... so "ready" === "charging".... is that a problem?


5. BMS must be powered _after_ main battery switch - so that if you turn off battery (E.g., months storage) it wont be draining your battery still



NOTE:
- Power enabled input alone -> allows discharging + opens pin #1 (charge enabled) for normal charging
- Charge enabled input w/ power enabled -> allows cell balancing + opens pin #5 (charge saftey)

So we have two questions here:
- whether to hook up charge controllers to "charge enabled" -vs- "charge saftey"
  - the answer here is to hook them up to charge enabled, so that we can always charge - even if we dont want to allow cell balancing?

- another question here is whether to put a switch on the "charge power source" input
  - i.e., then we can manually switch the pack into "charging mode" and tell it not to balance unless its switched on


Note: about those digital outputs, they pull to "ground" since the BMS doesn't want to assume what voltage you'll be using. it also fails "off" (i.e., when bms is turned off, the circuit is open - for saftey)


Note: they have a diagram about using a relay to power a contactor, since contactors use higher than 175ma on startup


----

NOTE: canbus:

Cut a slit down the length of the wire with a knife, pull the wires out of it, cut off the casing with a knife, and then strip the individual wires as normal. All you need is a sharp utility knife and a wire stripper made for the size wire (CAN wire is 20 gauge wire).Dec 8, 2019

How do you strip this CAN Bus Wire? - Technical Discussion ...

---

https://cdn.shopify.com/s/files/1/1820/0269/files/orion__connect_manual.pdf?2876917943243069970

BMS Wifi Connect module

  - pin #1: Power B
    - TL:DR;
      - dont use this
    - Details:
      - Two power pins (Power A and Power B) are provided and either pin may be used to fully power the device
      - Power may be provided from a 12V - 48V DC nominal power source.
      - Typical power consumption is less than 1 watt, but the device may briefly draw up to 6 watts when WiFi is in use.
  - [use] pin #2: Power A
    - TL:DR;
      - connect this to positive battery bus bar, fused at 3A
    - Details:
      - same as pin #1
  - pin #3: null
  - [use] pin #4: ground
    - TL:DR;
      - connect this to the negative ground bus bar
    - Details:
      - The ground pin must be connected to the negative of the power supplies.
      - The ground pin *must* be connected to the same ground as any other devices on the connected CANBUS, including any Orion BMS or Orion Jr. BMS units.
  - pin #5: null
  - pin #6: null
  - pin #7: CAN_H
    - TL:DR;
      - dont use this, use the other CAN_H
    - Details:
      - These are the CANBUS connections.
      - These are connected to the Orion BMS using shielded twisted pair cable.
      - For information on signals connecting the CANBUS signals to the Orion BMS or to a CANBUS enabled Orion Jr. BMS
  - pin #8: CAN_L
    - TL:DR;
      - dont use this, use the other CAN_L
    - Details:
      - same as pin #7
  - [use] pin #9: CAN_H
    - TL:DR;
      - connect this to the bms CAN_H
    - Details:
      - same as pin #7
  - [use] pin #10: CAN_L
    - TL:DR;
      - connect this to the bms CAN_L
    - Details:
      - same as pin #7


NOTE: before the orion wifi connect device will work, the BMS must be set to transmit this data.
  - This is done by enabling support for the “Data Logging Display Module” in the Orion BMS profile as shown below.
  - This is available under the “Addon Settings” tab for the Orion BMS or under the “CANBUS Settings” tab for the Orion Jr. BMS.
Important: This setting MUST be enabled for the device to function!


--

https://www.orionbms.com/manuals/pdf/jr2_operational_manual.pdf


---

Cell tap wiring harness info:

> Wiring can also be verified by carefully using a multimeter, but the use of the tap validation tool is the
recommended method. Care must be taken not to short any pins with the multimeter. Personal
safety equipment including protective eye-wear and gloves and arc-flash resistant clothing
should be worn for protection in the event of an arc flash. In order to avoid two probes on the
connector, the negative probe should be attached to the negative most terminal of the negative most
cell in the pack rather than on the connector. Then, being careful not to short pins or touch the probe,
carefully measure each of the pins on the connector starting with the current sensor - and + wires and
the pin for 1-. Pin 1+ should read the voltage of the first cell (3.3V for example), pin 2 should read the
sum of the first two cells (6.6V for example), and so forth. The connection for cell 8 and 9- should read
the same voltage since they are connected to the same potential.

> When connecting the harness to the BMS for the first time, (after verifying correct wiring), first adjust
the cell population settings in the BMS software so the BMS is aware which cells it should be expecting
to see. Once you have uploaded the profile to the BMS (see the software manual for more information
on this), use the live cell voltages screen to verify that all cell voltages are reading correctly. Then verify
on the diagnostic trouble code screen that no “open wire faults,” “wiring faults,” or “low cell” faults are
present on the BMS. Open wire or wiring faults indicate that the BMS has detected a problem with the
cell tap wiring. If errors are found or if cell voltages are not matching properly, do not leave the
BMS connected to the pack for long periods of time as it may drain cells and cause damage to
them. If the BMS begins to rapidly flash the red LED, immediately disconnect the cell tap
harness as this indicates that the BMS may be getting damaged by incorrect wiring. Note that the
absence of a rapidly flashing red LED does not necessarily indicate correct wiring


--

after all wired, connect the serial port to usb connection

plug into computer

install bms programer software;


unzip
➜ wget --directory-prefix=~/Downloads https://www.orionbms.com/downloads/orionjr2_utility_stable.zip 
➜ sudo apt install default-jre
➜ java --version
➜ chmod +x ~/Downloads/orionjr2utility/JrApp.jar
➜ java -jar ~/Downloads/orionjr2utility/JrApp.jar


check that your computer recognizes the serial device:

```
~ at 17:46:00
➜ dmesg | grep tty
[    0.150028] printk: console [tty0] enabled
[95470.667881] usb 1-2: FTDI USB Serial Device converter now attached to ttyUSB0
```
note how it says "serial device converter now attached to ttyUSB0


NOTE: if you're not seeing the serial pop up in the software to connect to the device, its probably because your user does not have permissions to use the serial port.
run this to add yourself to the dialout group, which has permissions to those ports:
```
sudo gpasswd -a YourUsername dialout
```
(or just run as sudo...: `sudo java -jar ~/Downloads/orionjr2utility/JrApp.jar`)


---

follow quickstart guide for wifi connect module. its pretty ez. supports lots of networks so no worries if this wont be your perm network: https://www.orionbms.com/downloads/documents/connect_quickstart.pdf
