# Sizing Wires

Metal connectors melt if you put too much current through them [(see why)](0.consideration.melting-wires.md).
- Therefore, for safety, you must be sure that your wire is capable of handling the current you intend to pass through it. (Note: You must also be sure that your circuit will protect your wires for any current you _did not_ intend to pass through it with [fuses and breakers](fuses-and-breakers.md))

Metal conductors cause a voltage drop proportional to their length [(see why)][0.consideration.voltage-drop.md]
- Therefore, for efficiency, you must be sure that your wire is thick enough to efficiently conduct the current you intend to pass through it.

# theory

### consideration 1: safety under load

You want to make sure that the wire can safely conduct the current you need through it.
  - i.e., `safe-gauge = f(circuit-amps)`

This is because
- [metal conductors will allow enough current to pass through them to melt them](0.consideration.melting-wires.md)
- the amount of current metal conductors can handle safely is [dependent on the surface area of the conductors cross-section](../0.fundamentals-of-electricity/resistance-of-conductors.md)

### consideration 2: efficiency

In addition to [making sure that the wire will not melt and cause a fire](#consideration-1-safety-under-load),

You want to make sure that the wire can efficiently conduct the current along the full length of the circuit.
  - i.e., `efficient-gauge = f(circuit-amps, circuit-length)`

This is because:
- metal conductors produce a [voltage drop proportional resistance](0.consideration.voltage-drop.md)
- resistance of a conductor increases with the length of the conductor
- this voltage drop means energy wasted in the transmission of power

# practice

### gauge
Wire sizing has been standardized to two standards across the globe:

- American Wire Gauge (AWG)
  - standard in north america
  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_wire_gauge

- International Electricians Commission (IEC 60228)
  - formally internationalized the standards set forth by the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) [todo:source]
  - standard in most of the world
  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEC_60228

You can readily find wires sold in these different sizes.

### sizing for safety

Ampacity is the maximum current that a conductor can carry continuously under the conditions of use without exceeding its temperature rating. The safe ampacity per gauge of wire has been defined by the National Electric Code, described in the table below.

Note - each manufacturer defines their own ampacities - based on their wires and the application. These, however, are good rules of thumb follow.

Note - the constant temperature rating of the insulator on the wire is critical to the ampacity

Note - where and how the wire is stored is critical to the ampacity


>Cable ampacity of a single conductor is calculated based on the size of the electrified conductor, the established ambient temperature and the temperature rating of the insulation and jacket compounds. An increase in temperature rating of the compounds and/or an increase in conductor size will increase cable ampacity. Conversely, an increase in ambient temperature will decrease ampacity.


> However, the number of current-carrying conductors found in a cable also affects ampacity. When a group of cables is bunched closely together, the NEC requires a derating of the ampacity for each individual cable. This is because tightly gathered cables can create a significant buildup of heat, which could rise above the rated temperature of the compounds used. This bunching effect also hinders heat dissipation, further increasing the risk of heat-related cable damage. Refer to NEC Table 310.15(B)(2)(a) for specifics about ampacity derating based on the number of cables used in cable, conduit or raceway.

>It is important to remember that heat degrades most ordinary insulating materials, and this decay directly affects cable ampacity — yet another reason to take current-carrying capacity into account when selecting a cable. By doing so, you confirm that the conductor’s insulating material and jacket can handle the heat load caused by electrical current flow and eliminate the possibility of exposing cables to temperatures higher than they are designed to manage.

TODO: explain why each factor affects ampacity: https://www.lapptannehill.com/news/post/ampacity-choosing-cable-when-the-heat-is-on

##### quick reference table for safety

This table defines the safe ampacities per gauge for common amp loads, in AWG, as defined by the American Boat and Yacht Club standards and the National Electric code. This table assumes 75°C rated insulation* (and 105°C rated insulation*).

- 15 amp => 14 gauge (16 gauge)
- 20 amp => 12 gauge (14 gauge)
- 30 amp => 10 gauge (12 gauge)
- 40 amp => 8 gauge (10 gauge)
- 50 amp => 6 gauge (8 gauge)
- 70 amp => 4 gauge (6 gauge)
- 100 amp => 2 gauge (4 gauge)
- 200 amp => 0 gauge** (2 gauge**)
- 250 amp => 2/0 gauge** (0 gauge**)
- 300 amp => 3/0 gauge** (2/0 gauge**)

Outlined by the:
- [American Boat and Yacht Club (ABYC Ampacities)](http://assets.bluesea.com/files/resources/reference/21731.pdf)
- [National Electric Code (NEC 310-16)](http://www.walrad.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/WALRAD-USA-LLC-Wire-Chart.pdf)

Notes:
 - *: the constant temperature that the insulator of the wire is rated to withstand makes a huge difference in the ampacity calculation.
 - **: for a `single conductor in free air`; the other ampacity ratings were for `up to 3 conductors in sheath`

[question!]: so if you buy a wire rated for 105 and put max amps through it .... you're generating heat ... which is energy loss. How significant?

### sizing for efficiency

Although a conductor can safely carry a particular current continuously, depending on the length of the conductor, this can come with significant losses of efficiency. The ampacity of a wire is simply the minimum safe current that can be passed through it; to have an efficient circuit, you must consider the voltage drop that occurs over large lengths of wire.

Voltage drop can be significant enough that loads which are sensitive to the voltage they receive will no longer operate, so it is important to think through carefully.

Voltage drop increases across a conductor in proportion to the length of the conductor. This voltage drop can be mitigated by increasing the diameter of the wire.

##### quick reference table for efficiency

This table defines the minimum required gauge for common amp loads, for a 3% or less voltage drop over 15 feet (and 20 feet) at 120V[TODO:is-this-120-or-12], in AWG.

- 10 amp => 12 gauge (10 gauge)
- 20 amp => 10 gauge (8 gauge)
- 30 amp => 8 gauge (6 gauge)
- 40 amp => 6 gauge (6 gauge)
- 50 amp => 6 gauge (4 gauge)
- 70 amp => 4 gauge (2 gauge)

Referenced from this [chart](http://assets.bluesea.com/files/resources/newsletter/images/DC_wire_selection_chartlg.jpg) by the good people at Blue Sea Systems.
