# Picking Wires

In addition to making sure that the wires are correctly rated to handle the load in your circuit, you need to make sure that they are correctly manufactured for your application. Wires come in different materials, core structures, and with different insulating sheaths.

# theory

[TODO]

# practice


### material

[TODO]

Wires for electrical circuits are sold in different materials. As you'd expect, each material has a different capability of how much current it can transfer before it gets overwhelmed.

TL:DR; use copper. Dont use aluminum unless you know what you're doing and why.

What you want: pure copper wire. Also known as: OFC (oxygen free copper), 99.9% Copper, Tinned Pure Copper.

What you do not want: Copper Clad Aluminum.

Aluminum, Copper, etc

Aluminum:
- corrodes

NOTE: do not mix Copper and Aluminum wires + connectors. They expand due to heat at different rates - therefore you will have loose and mechanically stressed connections if you mix them.

### structure

[TODO]

Multicore -vs- singlecore

Wires can have a single core, which is typically found in stationary home applications. These are cheaper - but less flexible and fair worse with vibration as they are more brittle.

### quality

[TODO]

The wiring and connectors you use must be UL Listed and Safety Rated. Make sure that you do not get bad quality wires from questionable distributors. Far too many folks will cell you wires that are not safety rated, and not listed, with poor quality. [1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mb0LQ19DEaI)

For connectors in particular, you need to make sure they're providing enough material - of suitable thickness - to securely connect to you wire. Many suppliers will distribute connectors that do not provide enough material to be able to firmly crimp onto the wire you are attaching.

Further, many cheaper quality wires will also come with a insulating sheath of lower quality. If your circuit has vibrations or motion - you may need a higher quality sheathing that will withstand this mechanical wear.

### application

Your application may come with special considerations that the wire you use must support.

##### solar and outdoor

Solar wires must be UV resistant [source]. The UV rays of the sun will destroy the insulating sheath - unless it is specifically rated for it.

##### automotive

Automotive wires must be resistant to vibrations and more mechanical wear, as the wires will be in motion. [source]

##### marine

Marine wires must be resistant to vibrations and more mechanical wear - as well as water resistant [source].

# recommendations

[TODO]

cables:
- copper welding wire [1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mb0LQ19DEaI)
  - easiest to work with
  - indoor only
  - 4/0 - 6 gauge only
- automotive grade wire
  - easy to work with at low gauges
  - handles all environments
- solar
  - required if outdoor
  - rated for 30-40 years
  - specifically:
    - temco [1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mb0LQ19DEaI)
