# connectors

The connections made by wires in a circuit are made possible by connectors. Connectors are just as important in a circuit as the wires themselves - and the material selected for a connector must follow the same considerations as the wire. These connectors are permanently attached to wires in order to make it easy to use the wires in a circuit.

# theory

### considerations

- connector must be rated for the current
  - [just like a wires](./1.wires.md), the metal of a connector can melt if exposed to too much current.
  - the connector must be rated for the current you will be passing through it.

- connector-to-wire bond must be mechanically secure (will not wear)
  - if a connection undergoes mechanical stress, it will eventually wear out and fail
    - which could cause a short circuit or fire as you now have a loose connection
  - to prevent mechanical stress, the connection must be mechanically isolated

- connector-to-wire-bond must be gas tight (will not corrode)
  - corrosion of the metals will cause that area to have an increased resistance
    - as an increase in resistance in one area will cause it to heat more than the others
    - this will lead to mechanical failure under repeated cycles, due to mechanical wear
    - this may lead to fire if the area heats sufficiently hot to ignite its insulator or surroundings
  - to ensure a connection between the connector and wire will not corrode, the connection must be air tight
    - otherwise, normal moisture in the air will enter and corrode the wire

# practice


### installation

It is critical to securely connect your connectors to the wire, for the reasons listed in the [considerations](#considerations) above. Connectors are typically installed on wires with crimping and heat-shrink.

##### crimping

[Crimping](./2.connections.crimping.md) is the best way of attaching your connector to your wire. A good crimp will result in a cold weld - which is both mechanically strong and gas tight. Make sure to follow the [best practices of crimping](./2.connections.crimping.md) in order to get a good connection.

##### heat shrink

Further mechanical isolation can be added to the circuit with [heat-shrink](2.connections.heat-shrink.md). Once heat-shrink is "shrunk" - it will add mechanical rigidity to the area that it insulates. Further, it is added insulation that reduces the open, conducting surface area of your circuit - decreasing the chances of an accident.

Example: adhesive lined heatshrink: https://www.amazon.com/XHF2018-Dual-Wall-Shrink-Tubing/dp/B07FPNVCXY


### gauge

Choose the correct gauge of wire to make sure it can handle the current in your circuit.

Connectors are rated with the same standards that wires are - in gauges.  Therefore, it is best to choose the same gauge as the wire - as the gauge of the wire [should be appropriate for the circuit](./1.wires.md).



### types

There are different types of connectors, each of them is suited towards different requirements:
- Wire Lug / Ring Terminal
  - same thing
  - 8 gauge and up are called lugs
  - 10 gauge and smaller are called ring terminals
- Spade
- Butt Splice

- M4
  - waterproof
  - common in solar

### recommendations

for smaller gauges, get connectors with heatshrink insulation already attached. (otherwise, you'll need to add heatshrink anyway)

### crimpers

8 gauge and up -> dieless crimper
10 gauge and below -> ratcheting crimper



SEE MORE DEETS HERE : https://faroutride.com/electrical-system/
