# theory

purpose of fuses and breakers:
- protect wires from overheating -> causing fire
- protect equipment from breaking

why they are needed:
- wires melt if you put too much current through [see why](0.consideration.melting-wires.md)

how they work:
- a fuse breaks, and a breaker trips, if current passing through it exceeds a threshold

---

# practice


consideration:
- fuses and breakers are rated for a specific voltage! you can not use a fuse rated for 120V in a 12V circuit

### breakers vs fuses
[4](https://library.automationdirect.com/fuses-or-circuit-breakers-which-should-you-use/)
[5](https://www.c3controls.com/white-paper/circuit-breaker-or-fuse-difference/)

##### breakers

Pros:
- in most cases they can double as a power disconnect [4][5]
  - which provides a great deal of convenience to any equipment that may require regular service
  - for these applications, breakers are even available with lock-out/tag-out facilities
- breakers are inherently safe [4][5]
  - the electrical connections are typically located behind a protective panel, which completely eliminates any possibility of electrocution.
  - valuable in those situations when non-electrical personnel are required to service the equipment.
- usually provide a visual indicator when they have tripped [4][5]
  - can save a lot of diagnostic time


Cons:
- more expensive
- wear out over time

##### fuses

Pros:
- cheap
- easy to install
- can be easily swapped out for larger sizes - if current was underestimated (and wires are capable of handling it (e.g., surge current))

Cons:
- exposed electrical connections [4][5]
  -  these sockets expose the technician to a live circuit - if needing to replace



### rating

the fuse / breaker must be for a lower rating than the wire. that way, the fuse will blow safely before the wire ignites


### gfci

gfci breakers are an attempt to save the most valuable equipment you have - your life. [Humans can be killed by electricity](0.consideration.death-by-electrocution.md).

gfci breakers make sure that all of the current it puts out goes right back through its negative terminal. This catches cases where electricity has found a path back to ground outside of the GFCI circuit - like through someones body.

### polarity

dc breakers may be polarized

### maximum interupting amacity / capacity

breakers can only interupt up-to a certain amount of amps * volts -> as otherwise an arc will occur and complete the circuit.

further, if they go beyond that rating, they should self extinguish - after catching fire, it should take less than 30 seconds for it to deform past operational form and not spread the fire beyond itself.


### interupt capacity (same as above, todo-merge)

in extreme situations, fuses and breakers under too much current can melt and not function:
- https://www.bluesea.com/support/articles/Circuit_Protection/98/DC_Circuit_Protection

your breakers and fuses must be rated to be able to interrupt up to 1500amps

---

references:
- [2] short-circuit: https://www.exploratorium.edu/snacks/short-circuit#:~:text=If%20a%20short%20circuit%20occurs,preventing%20a%20fire%20from%20starting.


- [3] fuse selection diagram: http://assets.bluesea.com/files/resources/reference/20010.pdf

#### where to place it

in general, you need to place a fuse or a breaker:
  - before every source of power into your circuit, to protect against short circuits
    - since you want to protect against short circuits -> if there is a short circuit after the power is given, you want to shut off the circuit
    - this should be placed as close as possible to your power source
    - > The fuse should always be the first thing a power supply hits when it gets to a circuit. The reason is pretty simple. In the event of a fault that blows the fuse, the power is isolated to where it entered the circuit, thus the whole circuit is protected.
      - [1] https://electronics.stackexchange.com/a/183800/59733
  - before every load of power in your circuit, to protect the conductors and the appliance
    - since you want to make sure that in worst case scenario, no more current than is capable of being handled is passed through
    - placement:
      - the fuse should be as close to the power supply as possible, just like when protecting against short circuit, so that as little of the circuit is left unprotected as possible


i.e.,:
- put breaker/fuse in front of each power source
- put it as close to power source as possible
- protect _each_ circuit from the power source
- only on the power source - never on the grounding/negative wire
  - as otherwise you'll cut off a live circuit from ground - and it'll still try and find its way to ground itself (e.g., through you)


Question: only in front of hot? or do we need fuses on neg, too?
  - answer: never put fuse / breaker on negative
  - otherwise, you'll cut a circuit hot - and it will still be looking for ways to ground itself
    - like through you!

### recommendations

- Blue Sea Fuse Holders & Blue Sea ANL Fuses [https://www.explorist.life/how-to-wire-a-busbar/]


### products

##### types of breakers


Fixtures:
- HOM
- QO


QO is more reliable and higher quality in most settings. (some say QO break faster than other breakers?)

QO has more features and is more readily available (e.g., combination arcfault and groundfault)

Also,
- Tandem (2 lines one slot)
- GFCI (Ground Fault - saves lives)
- AFCI (Arc Fault - prevents fires)

