whenever you are wiring, you have to go through the following steps:

0. draw out the circuit you need to build
   1. sources (voltage + max amps)
   2. loads (voltage + max amps)
1. figure out the amps you'll need to push through the circuit at each branch
   1. series = same amps
   2. parallel = combine/split amps
3. figure out the required gauges of wire you'll need for those amps
   1. considering safety
      1. what is the ampacity of the wire
      2. how much buffer should you add for peace of mind
   2. considering efficiency
      1. resistance decreases with larger gauges -> less efficient
      2. voltage drop proportional to resistance * length of run -> can make your circuit not capable of supplying the required volts
4. figure out the material of the wire that you'll be using - appropriate for your application
   1. conductive material
      1. what metal?
         1. copper?
            1. OFC?
            2. Pure?
      2. what format?
         1. solid?
         2. stranded?
   2. insulating material
      1. uv rated?
      2. water rated?
      3. oil rated?
   3. quality
      1. UL listed?
      2. etc
5. figure out the required breakers and fuses
   1. when to use breaker -vs- fuse
   2. where to place the breaker/fuse
   3. for what voltage + amps should it be rated
   4. for what "tolerance"
      1. surge?
      2. heat?
   5. with what interrupt capacity?
      1. i.e., how many amps can it stop before arcing and melting
      2. note: _must_ be self extinguishing within 30 seconds
6. figure out what busbars and connectors you need
   1. what bus bars are required?
      1. how many branches do they need to support?
      2. how many amps do they need to be rated for?
      3. do they need fuses on them? or will there be breakers next to them?
   2. which type of connectors required
      1. forms
         1. lugs?
         2. ring terminals?
         3. ferrules?
         4. spades?
      2. sizes
         1. must fit busbars and components
      3. material
         1. must be same material as the wire - otherwise expands and contracts at different rates
   3. what protection do you need on the connectors?
      1. heatshrink?
      2. anti-corosion? (e.g., solidol)
7. get the required tools
   1. wire cutters
   2. wire strippers (may be able to use wire cutters)
   3. wire crimpers
      1. for 8+ gauge, special
      2. for 10- gague, more common

--

to do so:
1. draw the circuit out w/ loads and source
2. add fuse/breaker positions
3. define amps + volts needed to be supported
4. define the gauges of wires
5. define the size of the breakers
6. breakout circuit into list of wire runs
   1. define wire lengths per gauge
   2. define the connectors required per end
7. compile list of parts
   1. wires
   2. breakers + fuses
   3. connectors (+ protection for connectors)
   4. tools
